Retrieving Password Hashes
Most systems that use a password
authentication mechanism
need to store these passwords locally
on the machine.
Rather than storing passwords
in clear text,
modern authentication mechanisms usually
store them as hashes to improve security.
This means that during the authentication
process,
the password presented by the
user is hashed
and compared with the previously
stored message digest.
Identifying the exact type of hash
without having further information
about the program or mechanism
that generated it
can be very challenging and sometimes
even impossible.
When attempting to identify a message
digest type,
there are three important hash
properties to consider.
These include the length of the hash,
the character set used in the hash,
and any special characters used
by the hash.
A useful tool that can assist with hash
type identification is hashid.
To use it, we simply run the tool and
paste in the hash we wish to identify.
Here, we analyzed two different hashes.
While the first example returned
multiple possible matches,
the second narrowed down the hash
type to SHA-512 Crypt.
Next, let’s retrieve and analyze a few
hashes on our Kali Linux system.
Many Linux systems have the user password
hashes stored in the /etc/shadow file,
which requires root permissions to read:
The shadow file entry starts with the user
name followed by the password hash.
The hash is divided into sub-fields,
the first of which references the
SHA-512 algorithm.
The next sub-field is the salt,
A salt is a random value that’s used along
with the clear text password
to calculate a password hash.
This prevents hash-lookup attacks since
the password hash will vary
based on the salt value.
Let’s now turn our focus to
Windows targets
and discuss the various
hash implementations
and how we can leverage them
during an assessment.
On Windows systems, hashed user
passwords are stored
in the Security Accounts Manager, or SAM.
To deter offline SAM database
password attacks,
Microsoft introduced the SYSKEY feature,
which partially encrypts the SAM file.
Windows NT-based operating systems,
up to and including Windows 2003,
store two different password hashes:
LAN Manager, or LM,
which is based on DES, and NT LAN Manager,
or NTLM, which uses MD4 hashing.
LAN Manager is known to be very weak since
passwords longer than seven characters
are split into two strings and each piece
is hashed separately.
Each password string is also converted to
upper-case before being hashed
and, moreover, the LM hashing system does
not include salts,
making a hash-lookup attack feasible.
From Windows Vista on, the operating
system disables LM by default
and uses NTLM, which, among other things,
is case sensitive,
supports all Unicode characters, and does
not split the hash
into smaller, weaker parts.
However, NTLM hashes stored in the SAM
database are still not salted.
It’s worth mentioning that the SAM
database cannot be copied
while the operating system is running
because the Windows kernel keeps
an exclusive file system lock on it.
However, we can use mimikatz,
which is covered in much greater depth
in another module, to mount in-memory
attacks designed to dump the SAM hashes.
Among other things, mimikatz modules
facilitate password hash extraction
from the LSASS process memory
where they are cached.
Since LSASS is a privileged process
running under the SYSTEM user,
we need to launch mimikatz from
an administrative command prompt.
To extract password hashes, we must first
execute two commands.
The first is privilege::debug, which
enables the SeDebugPrivilge access right
required to tamper with another process.
If this command fails, mimikatz was most
likely not executed
with administrative privileges.
It’s important to understand that LSASS
is a SYSTEM process,
which means it has even higher privileges
than mimikatz
running with administrative privileges.
To address this, we can use the
token::elevate command
to elevate the security token from high
integrity to SYSTEM integrity.
If mimikatz is launched from a SYSTEM
shell, this step is not required.
Now we can use lsadump::sam to dump the
contents of the SAM database.
Nice, mimikatz has elegantly and
effectively
dumped the hashes as requested.